---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "Global Regular Expressions Print"
categories: article
tags: [grep, debug, develop, utility]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
comments_id: 83

author:
- kyryl horbushko
- Lviv
---

Searching... How many times did u search for something on u'r work during the last few days? 100, 200, or even more times. I think a bit - all our work is about searching. We search for a solution, we search for an answer, we search inputs, code, reason... endless search.
<!--more-->

If we do this a lot, the good way to do this - is to optimize this process as well as possible. A good point to start is to inspect existing methods and techniques that allow us to do this in a better way. 

## history

The problem is not a new one, and we (humans) trying to solve and optimize it for quite a long period of time. 

The very interesting page of the history of this process is the moment when [regular expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) was invented/described by [Stephen Cole Kleene](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Cole_Kleene). 

> *A regular expression, often called a pattern, specifies a set of strings required for a particular purpose*

Regex opens for us a lot more than just a regular search - we can perform searches using patterns.

And one of the utilities that use regex for search is [**grep** ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep) - a global search for regular expressions.

We must say *" Thank you!"* to Ken Thompson, author of the B language, who create this utility for his text editor **ed**. 

> The name is coming from the command *g/re/p* in the ed editor (this commands print all lines). 

There are a lot of modifications for grep (Global Regular Expressions Print): 

* **`egrep`** (Extended Global Regular Expressions Print) (`grep -E`)
* **`fgrep`** (Fixed-string Global Regular Expressions Print) (`grep -F`)
* **`pgrep`** (Process-ID Global Regular Expressions Print)

## theory

I don't know why, but when I just started no one from my team used this tool. I discover it for myself only a few years later. I was very surprised.

The invocation of the command can be done using the next synopsis:

```
grep [OPTION...] [PATTERNS] [FILE...]
grep [OPTION...] -e patterns ... [FILE...]
grep [OPTION...] -f file ... [FILE...]
```

> can be zero or more options arguments and zero or more file arguments

### env

The behavior of `grep` also depends on ENV variables:

- GREP_COLOR
- GREP_COLORS
- LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LANG
- LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LANG
- LANGUAGE, LC_ALL, LC_MESSAGES, LANG
- POSIXLY_CORRECT
- \_N_GNU_nonoption_argv_flags_
- GREP_OPTIONS (deprecated)

> I won't cover all of these variables, just list them here

## regular expression

The more interesting part - is if regex patterns that can describe a set of strings.

> there are a lot of papers about it like [this one](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ab/15-123S09/lectures/Lecture%2018%20-%20Regular%20Expressions.pdf)

It's good to know, that grep can work with 3 types of regex - `BRE`, `ERE`, and `PCRE`.

> 
- `BRE` - basic
- `ERE` - extended
- `PCRE` - perl-compatible

### fundamentals

The most important part is the characters that can be used for the construction of a pattern:

- special characters - `.?*+{|()[\^$`
- ordinal character - all other

The important moment in patterns - is it can have an operation. Each operation is separated with the `{` and `}` characters. Operator with `{` named as *interval expressions*.

Here they are:

* `?` - matched zero or more times
* `+` - matched one or more times
* `{n}`, `{n}?`, `{n}+` - matched exactly n times
* `{n,}` - matched n or more times
* `{,m}` - matched at most m times
* `{n,m}` - matched at least n times, but not more than m times
* `|` - or, can be used for joining operations
* `*?` - 0 or more times. Match as few times as possible
* `.` - any character
* `` - empty string
* `()` - override precedence rules

### character classes/bracket

Bracket - `[` and `]` - match any single character listed in it. If u add `ˆ` - this means NOT in the list.

> Example: `[0123456789]` - any single digit.

We can also use `range expression` - 2 char separated with a hyphen (`-`).

> Example: `[a-z]` - any single char between a and z.

There are also a few classes named available for use - like `[:digit:]`.

> The full list can be found [here](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/grep.1.html) 

The list of most interesting:

* `[` and `]` - match any single character listed in between
* `ˆ` - used with `[` and `]` NOT in the list
* `[:` - open class character
* `:]` - close class character
* `[=` - open equivalence class
* `=]` - close equivalence class
* `[.` - open collating class
* `.]` - close collating class
* `-` - range

### backslash/special expr

The character `\` with followed by some ordinary characters, has next meaning:

* `\` - escape char
* `\b` - empty string at the edge of a word
* `\B` - empty string provided it’s not at the edge of a word
* `\<` - empty string at the beginning of a word
* `\>` - empty string at the end of a word.
* `\w` - word constituent
* `\W` - non-word constituent
* `\s` - whitespace
* `\S` - non-whitespace

### anchors

Symbols that represent the beginning and end of the string:

* `ˆ` - beginning of the line
* `$` - end of the line

### back-reference

We can also match the substring previously matched:

* `\n` - example `(a)\1` match `aa`

### non-ASCII/non-printable

To do this - we can use ascii codes like `grep $'\u035B\t\u54C9'`.

## usage

The most interesting part - is to experiment and play a bit with this command.

> For this purpose, let's create a few files in some directory and play a bit. content of the file can be anything - in my case, I just grab 2 source files from some old project :]. 

We can search for some part of the string. Thus I'm using source code, I want to search for `: HTTPRequest` subclass:

```
grep -i ':\sHTTPRequest' <files>
```

The result:

```
/Users/khorbushko/Desktop/grep-play/DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift:struct DeployerGETAllAreasRequest: HTTPRequest {
/Users/khorbushko/Desktop/grep-play/DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift:struct DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest: HTTPRequest {
```

The true power starts when we combine different utilizes with `grep`.

The following example will print a list of all files in a directory:

```
ls /Users/khorbushko/Desktop/grep-play | grep '[a-zA-Z]*.[a-zA-Z]*'
```

Output:

```
DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift
DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift
марафон.pdf
```

If we want to list only swift files - just change the pattern - `'[a-zA-Z]*.swift'`

```
DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift
DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift
```

Or even better - we can search all files in the folder:

```
grep -rni '<pattern>' *
```
where 
* `r` - recursive
* `n` - line number 
* `i` - case insensetive

Example:

```
grep -rni 'HTTP' *                     
DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift:11:struct DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest: HTTPRequest {
DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift:28:  var method: HTTPMethod {
DeployerFetchAllTaskGETRequest.swift:32:  var endPoint: HTTPEndPoint {
DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift:11:struct DeployerGETAllAreasRequest: HTTPRequest {
DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift:16:  var endPoint: HTTPEndPoint {
DeployerGETAllAreasRequest.swift:20:  var method: HTTPMethod {
```

Search and replace:

```
grep -rl 'HTTP' * | xargs sed -i '' 's/HTTP/http/g'
```

where

* `r` - recursive
* `l` - `--files-with-matches` - if in file found something it's return file name once instead of line name

Examples are countless. This tool is very powerful, especially if u combine it with others.

> check all options [here](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/grep.1.html) 


## conclusion

Well, that was a short intro into the beautiful world of `grep`.  I believe that at first, it may look strange to u, but as soon as u start to use it, u realize that this utility is just for u.

## resources

* [Regular expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression)
* [grep](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep)